``Forty years ago a memorable academic year started, the ravages
of which are often deplored but also I must confess to having
been the happy beneficiary.

Charged by Prof Daniel Dugu\'e with the teaching of the
diplome d'Etudes Approfondies (DEA) de Statistique -- the Advanced
Studies degree in Statistics, constituting the first part of a
doctorate, I chose Data Analysis as the theme of the course.
Prof Dugu\'e laughed and said this covered all of statistics!
Under this broad banner, I wanted intended to multiply
Correspondence Analyses.  With such analyses, thanks to the
patience of Brigitte Cordier, working on an IBM 1620 -- a
pocket calculator today but one that the Dean Yves Martin
provided for the price of a Chateau! -- I was able, in Rennes,
to aim at conquering linguistics, economics, and other fields.

To analyze, data were necessary.  I was resolved to send the
students of the DEA  to collect sheafs of these precious flowers.

From my first class, I announced that the students should
undertake internships.  But this call, repeated from week to week,
had no response.  The students thought that, if they survived a
written exam and an oral then no-one could ask them for more.
Other than by cramming, they would have nothing to gain from the
novelty of an excursion into practical things.  Moreover, even if
they accepted or even were enticed by my project then who would
host their intership?

The pretty month of May 1968 would change all that!

Living in Orl\'eans, I did not hear the shouting from Lutetia
[i.e.\ from Paris and also from the university; Lutetia, or
Lut\`ece, is the name of a town pre-existing Paris and the
Ar\`enes de Lut\`ece
is a public park very close to Universit\'e Pierre et Marie Curie,
Paris 6]  but
only distant echoes.  Finally, in September, both boss and
students had to resign themselves to each take back their role,
each cautiously but also brazenly!

Since the month of May, the university was stigmatized as being
arthritic, not offering a preparation for life.  Not I but others
had extolled internships.  Machine-like of course the students came
to tell me that they wanted to carry out internships.  I had triumphed!
Yes, yes, they confessed in stammering, you had told us.

It was just so too for those who in November 1967 had refused any
intern, now in September 1968 were keen to save their native land
by pampering young people.  The way opened up for Correspondence
Analysis, a methodology that in practice was very soon associated
with hierarchical clustering.''
